Affirmative Action: A Deceptive and Dangerous Policy
	The America that every citizen has learned growing up in this amazing country is that she is the land of the free, the home of equal opportunity for all. At the founding of this great nation the fore-fathers transcribed in the Declaration of Independence, “We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal” (“Declaration of Independence”).  It is when this equality is threatened, consumed by its own endless resolve for impartiality, that it becomes a necessity to denounce the gospel of discrimination that has stealthily crept its way into our lives like a lion upon a sheep. If allowed to remain in the land of the free it will undoubtedly infect the minds of all Her constituents and corrupt them of their innocence, especially those of the youth. It is now that affirmative action must be abolished from all facets of education and business. 
	Affirmative action is “A set of procedures designed to eliminate unlawful discrimination among applicants, remedy the results of such prior discrimination, and prevent such discrimination in the future.” (LII Staff). It found its first appearance in the 1930’s when African Americans wanted work under the New Deal that whites had (Kessler-Harris, Alice). The phrase was first coined by President John F. Kennedy after signing an executive order in 1961 to ensure that all people are treated equal without considering race, color, religion, sex, or origin ("The History of Affirmative Action.”). Thanks to the hard work and effort of the early pioneers of the cause affirmative action has brought about numerous state laws, executive orders and directives, and judicial successes (Kessler-Harris, Alice). After fifty years in operation affirmative action has evolved into a paradoxical shadow of its former self. Instead of eliminating discrimination and bringing about equality of opportunity to all citizens of The United States of America, it has grown to be a discriminatory policy in the guise of equality.
	Discriminatory practices of affirmative action are legal and in current use of major institutions of higher education. The supreme court decided in the case involving Fisher v. University of Texas, 2016, in favor of the University of Texas that admissions based on race was constitutional under the fourteenth amendment (LEE, REBECCA K). This decision ruled that programs using race as a factor for decision making was constitutional to promote further diversity within the university but the program needs to be narrowly tailored and must withstand intense inspection from the courts (LEE, REBECCA K). These race-based, affirmative-action decisions have led hypocritical outcomes; none are more prominent than Asian and white test scores for admission in top colleges. Asian and White students must score significantly higher on their ACT/SAT tests to be granted admission into particular colleges than do their minority counter-parts (Brint, Steven). This is constitutional if the schools are trying to maintain a campus that is racially diverse. Another study performed by Thomas J. Espenshade, showed that selective colleges in the year 1997 admitted blacks at a higher percentage rate than applicants of any other races. The current college application programs in effect today have disadvantaged Asians and whites coming from lower-income families the most (Espenshade, Thomas J). Students for Fair Admissions v. President and Fellows of Harvard College, a current, on-going case in Boston’s district courts, has the future of affirmative action hanging in the balance. The plaintiff, Students for Fair Admissions, asserts that Harvard uses race and a factor in admission and intentionally discriminates against Asian Americans (UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT). Harvard denies these accusations. What is intriguing being that on their website they state: “What’s at Stake: The ability of colleges and universities across the country to create the diverse communities […]” (“Harvard Admissions Lawsuit.”). This is the go-to claim for all race-based admissions program. In Fisher v. University of Texas the university made the same go-to claim that the use of race was relevant in creating a diverse student body; the supreme court upheld this claim. This go-to claim is clear; race is a necessary component in the admissions decision of universities to maintain student body diversity. Race is a necessary component.
	These practices go beyond colleges and universities and into the private and public workforce. In fact, the application of Fisher v. University of Texas is the on-going precedent for affirmative action in the workplace. This allows employers in the public and private sector to use race as a decision-making factor in their hiring process or for employee layoffs (LEE, REBECCA K). Employers still need to withstand strict scrutiny from the courts and have sufficient evidence to back up their claim that decisions based on race are beneficial and therefore necessary. Hideg and Ferris in their writing note that many American’s believe that “to promote equality in the workplace, effective AA policies promote inequality when selecting employees […]”. They make the claim that if individuals were taught to better cope with these discrepancies then they will a reduced response to affirmative action policies. Inequality when selecting employees is okay and outrage will be reduced if we can prepare the people beforehand.
	Discrimination per Merriam-Webster is, “the act, practice, or an instance of discriminating categorically rather than individually”. The go-to claim used by colleges, universities and even public or private business still rely on the same claim that race, when used to help create and sustain student body diversity, is a constitutionally acceptable practice. While the supreme courts have ruled in favor of this thought process, it is, by definition, a discriminatory practice as they are giving merit on a categorical basis rather than on an individual basis. The claim that unequal affirmative action policies are acceptable if the dissenting population is equipped to better deal with the policies driving inequality. This claim is also, by definition, discriminatory as it still undertakes judgment on a categorical basis rather than on an individual basis. Affirmative action comes to the land of the equal disguised as a wolf in sheep’s clothing, and although it is described in terms of increasing the opportunities of certain minority groups it is still discrimination described in positive connotation. The argument for affirmative action ultimately breaks down into the following: We must instill policies that give advantage to group A, even though this will disadvantage group B. It does not matter whom group A or B is; when broken down into a simple statement like that, it is easy to see that it is discriminatory. The answer that one can only conclude is that if America wants to follow the path enlightened by our forefathers in the Declaration of Independence then we must eliminate the use of any race-based factors in any state, private or public decision-making processes; and thus, eliminate affirmative action policies altogether.

Works Cited
Brint, Steven. “No Longer Separate, Not Yet Equal: Race and Class in Elite College Admission and Campus Life.” American Journal of Education, vol. 117, no. 3, May 2011, pp. 429–432. EBSCOhost, doi:10.1086/659214.
“Declaration of Independence: A Transcription.” National Archives and Records Administration, National Archives and Records Administration, www.archives.gov/founding-docs/declaration-transcript.
Espenshade, Thomas J., et al. No Longer Separate, Not Yet Equal: Race and Class in Elite College Admission and Campus Life. Princeton University Press, 2009, pp. 68. EBSCOhost, search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=e000xna&AN=329718&site=ehost-live.
Gruhi, Johi, and Susan Welch. “The Impact of the Bakke Decision on Black and Hispanic Enrollment in Medical and Law Schools.” Social Science Quarterly (University of Texas Press), vol. 71, no. 3, Sept. 1990, pp. 458–473. EBSCOhost, search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=aph&AN=9103182600&site=ehost-live.
“Harvard Admissions Lawsuit.” Harvard Admissions Lawsuit, 2019, admissionscase.harvard.edu/.
Hideg, Ivona, and D. Lance Ferris. “Dialectical Thinking and Fairness-Based Perspectives of Affirmative Action.” Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 102, no. 5, May 2017, pp. 782–801. EBSCOhost, doi:10.1037/apl0000207.
Kessler-Harris, Alice. “The Pursuit of Fairness: A History of Affirmative Action.” American Historical Review, vol. 112, no. 1, Feb. 2007, p. 241. EBSCOhost, doi:10.1086/ahr.112.1.241.
LEE, REBECCA K. “The Future of Workplace Affirmative Action After Fisher.” St. John’s Law Review, vol. 89, no. 2/3, Summer/Fall2015 2015, pp. 597–619. EBSCOhost, search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=aph&AN=115108980&site=ehost-live.
LII Staff. “Affirmative Action.” Legal Information Institute, Legal Information Institute, 2 Mar. 2018, www.law.cornell.edu/wex/affirmative_action.
"The History of Affirmative Action." NYTimes.com Video Collection 3 Aug. 2017. Business Insights: Global. Web. 12 July 2019.
Works Cited
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS BOSTON DIVISION. 2018, samv91khoyt2i553a2t1s05i-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/Doc-620-SFFA-Proposed-FF-and-CL-redacted.pdf.



